hi this is Matt Zumwalt and this is a
recording of the presentation I gave at
pay sake at Oxford University in autumn
2017 this was a meeting of digital
preservation specialists from libraries
and archives around the world I work at
protocol labs which is a research and
development and deployment lab for
networks our main projects are ipfs the
interplanetary file system and file
claim which you may have heard about in
the news recently we also have a number
of underlying open source projects that
focus on building patterns into the web
that make the protocols we use
future-proof so when I say that we focus
on decentralizing the web or Reedy
centralizing the web a useful way to
explain this is by referring to a
diagram from a paper from the early days
of the development of the internet so
this paper was published in 1962 on the
Left it shows a client-server
architecture where if you imagine each
of the dots in each of these diagrams as
being a machine or a node on the network
in your client-server structure you have
one server that serves many clients and
those clients are unable to connect to
each other they are only able to connect
to the server in the middle diagram
which this paper called decentralized
you have a federated architecture where
some machines are able to connect with
each other but then the other client
nodes are only able to connect to those
super nodes and they are not able to
connect directly with each other and
then over on the right you have a
peer-to-peer architecture where any node
is able to connect with any other node
but I was also able to rely on other
nodes as a relay when passing
information between them and other nodes
on the network
so the way that I got into this work of
decentralization was that I was I spent
a number of years helping libraries and
archives to build systems for curating
their digital collections and especially
with the bent towards preservation but
as as we watch the web developer round
us it became clear that there was this
pattern that I like to think of as being
a form of digital captivity where the
data that we create is becoming captured
in something like zoos or something like
a cage where the data is not allowed to
thrive in the wild and it's not under
the control of the people who created it
instead it's forced to exist in some
pre-configured system that's controlled
by other parties and as as my work
progressed in helping libraries and
archives to build their own systems I
became convinced that the systems we
were creating was still we're still
participating in that same system
despite the best intentions we were just
building another form of cage rather
than helping the patrons of those
libraries and Archives to thrive with
their data existing in the wild and so I
became fairly strongly convinced that
the solution is to rebuild the web now
let's look at an example in response to
the election in 2016
people became concerned that the new
federal administration would start
making climate data less available
either by turning off servers or
obstructing availability in some other
way and so there was an up swelling of
effort of people attempting to move that
data to other safer locations from a
preservation perspective it's important
to think about what this means
this was thousands of people spending
days weeks or months of their lives
attempting to preserve other people's
data now what happened in this effort
was that there were some unintended
consequences
now the thing to keep in mind is that
these people were attempting to help
those federal agencies these are people
who care about the EPA and they care
about the data produced by the EPA but
when they made replicas of the data then
that data became something that was in
competition with the original so these
new locations where the data had been
moved to were competing with the
original source we're competing with the
EPA rather than reinforcing it and this
is because the web itself is structured
in the pattern that forces this kind of
competition what we need is another
structure to the web one where it's easy
to replicate data where once you've
replicated data it's easy to validate
that two copies that are in different
locations on the web are identical and
where the replication of data across
that network increases availability
rather than creating a situation of
competition that having more copies of
the data on the web simply increases the
number of paths that a node could follow
in order to retrieve the data that it
wants by switching to this alternative
pattern on the web it brings up a new
kind of conversation where rather than
being a confident competition to define
which locations we should rely on to
retrieve content instead it becomes a
conversation about what data are at risk
what are the ways that they're at risk
why are those data valuable who are they
valuable to and who should be holding
copies of it what this does in an
underlying way is it turns access
discovery and preservation into
participatory activities and they become
conversations between people who care
about data and the institutions and
community organizations that represent
them or aggregate resources from those
communities so if we express this as a
simple principle
it's that information should be
possessed by the people who rely on it
and that communities and institutions
should aggregate information and
resources to support access discovery
and preservation now from a from our
libraries and archives perspective there
shouldn't be anything revolutionary
about these ideas they're simple and
straightforward and that's because
libraries and archives
were created as a means of sharing
possession of information resources but
let's look at how the current structure
of the web stands as an obstacle to
achieving this because the current the
current structure of the web uses an
approach of location addressing we
identify content by its location rather
than content addressing where you
identify and identify information by its
content so for a simple example if you
think about how we identify a book when
I recommend a book to you I recommend it
based on you should read a book by the
with this title by this author I might
tell you when it was published or what
the publisher was and you can go and
find any copy of that book that matches
that description of its content and read
the book being confident that you're
reading the book I recommend it this is
very different from how we how we
identify content on the web because on
the web when I use an HTTP link I'm
pointing to a location and then when you
use that location to retrieve that
content if you download a copy of it
you're making something that from the
perspective of the web is a
fundamentally different thing because
it's in a different location now if we
start using links to those other
locations each copy of the content
becomes a distinct thing in a distinct
location with its own identifier which
has its own profile of who relies on it
and points to it and so that's where
you've created this situation where even
if you were replicating the content in
an attempt to reinforce availability
you're actually undermining the original
copy because you're competing with it to
be the location now the alternative to
this is to use a content addressed
approach with digital information so the
key benefit with content addressing is
that if anyone on the network has a copy
of the content you'll be able to find it
and retrieve it and the key idea here is
that location doesn't matter what
matters is that you are able to get the
content that you requested and to be
confident that you are retrieving the
content that you want it and the way we
achieve this is by using cryptographic
hashing now for a digital preservation
community this should be a familiar
concept because we use this pattern with
fixity checking where you can put any
content into it through a cryptographic
hashing algorithm and that algorithm
generates a unique string of letters and
numbers that represents the content if
you put exactly the same content through
that algorithm you will always get the
same hash as a result you will get the
same string of letters and numbers as a
result but if you put content that has
changed even a bit even a single bit
within that content if it has changed
you will get a different hash so what
this means is that those hashes are
universally unique identifiers for
precisely that content with a content
addressed approach we use those hashes
as the identifier for the content and
what this achieves is that benefit or if
anyone on the network has a copy of that
content you'll be able to request it
using that hash and you'll be able to
retrieve it from them once you've
retrieved it you'll be able to validate
it against a hash you use you can
validate it against that hash identifier
and know that you got the content that
you were requesting let's look at how
this affects patterns like accession of
data where if I have content that I've
been sharing with my peers using a
content addressed approach at any point
I can share that identifier with the
library and the library could accession
that content I would never have to
upload the content all I have to do is
pass the identifier to the library and
they can retrieve the content from the
web on their own but you can do this in
a more robust way where I might submit
metadata about my content or I might
submit information metadata like a
version history so you could have a
series of versions of a data set that I
think are important for the library to
hold in their collections all I need to
do is submit the hash of that versioned
history of the content so I'm submitting
the hash of the metadata and the library
can pull in the whole corpus of
information including the metadata as
they see fit underlying this pattern the
thing that makes this powerful is that
you're using hash linked data structures
so this is a this is a pattern that
we've already seen impact in
areas of our industry or areas of the
technology industry through sit through
technologies like get an apache spark or
Bitcoin and BitTorrent
all of these technologies underlying
them they are using the pattern of hash
linked to data structures so what are
the benefits here why are we using hash
linked data structures so one benefit is
that we can decouple content from its
location which we've already talked
about this allows any content to exist
in many places and to pass through many
hands without losing integrity
underlying that is this notion of
cryptographic integrity checking you can
use the the link value itself you can
use that hash to validate the content
that you got and so this is a powerful
tool for ensuring the integrity of
entire systems of data over time and as
their term it transmitted over the web
now the most fundamental thing that's
making hash link data structures
powerful is that what you're doing is
creating immutable data structures so
this notion of immutable data structures
is prominent in the field of field of
computer science it's been around since
the advent of computer languages or
programming languages and the main idea
here is that you can create data
structures that do not mutate and
whenever you're creating a new version
of data you have a new identifier for
that new version so to put this together
let's look at how ipfs does this when
you're running an ipfs node one of the
ways that you can add content is from
the command line there are many
different api's that you could use to
add content to an ipfs node but this
gives us an easy example so if I have a
file or a whole whole corpus of files on
my system or a corpus of data on my
system I can tell ipfs to add that
content to its repository and ipfs will
return the cryptographic hash that
identifies that content I can then use
that hash to request the content through
any ipfs node anywhere on the network
and that node will be able to use that
hash to retrieve the content validate it
and return
to me I PFS nodes are also backwards
compatible with the HTTP web the regular
web as we know it today where you can
use these hashes to ask any IP FS node
to retrieve content for you this allows
this allows tools like web browsers to
use HTTP to retrieve content that's
actually stored on the peer-to-peer web
now to look at a concrete example the
text is a bit smaller here but this is a
real hash for a snapshot of the English
version of Wikipedia having added that
entire corpus which is about 2 terabytes
on to an IP FS node you then have the
hash for their content and then you can
retrieve any subset of the content such
as an individual page from Wikipedia
using that hash plus the path within
that corpus or the path within that data
set where you can find the content that
you want and as we saw before you could
use that through directly interacting
with an IP FS node using IP FS api's or
you can retrieve it over the HTTP web
using those same paths and those same
identifiers what this opens up is the
possibility of a notion of pinning where
if I have content on my machine and you
want to hold a copy of that content on
to your machine what you do is you tell
your IP FS node to pin that hash on to
that machine and what that tells the
node to do is to retrieve the content
corresponding with that hash and to hold
onto it on that machine until or unless
you unpin it and run some form of
garbage collection to clean up after so
let's look at how this impacts
accessioning access discovery and
preservation such as the activities that
libraries and archives engage in all the
time the main idea here is that we can
use sets of pinned hashes and treat them
as collections this gives us content
addressed peer to peer collections since
this group is focused on preservation
let's start there so the first example
the first
benefit is that replication becomes easy
and transparent that in and of itself is
extremely useful in a preservation
context when you're moving data between
different storage devices or different
storage contexts you have the ability to
replicate and then to validate the
results very easily but there's the
other powerful pattern that a downloaded
content copy of the content possibly
downloaded by one of your patrons if
they downloaded it using a pattern like
ipfs or using a content addressed
approach now that downloaded copy is a
valid replica that you can
cryptographically validate at any point
which opens up the door to a pattern of
participatory preservation if someone
cares about data they can replicate it
on to their machine possibly telling you
that they've replicated it and then that
copy is an actual valid valid a table
replica of the content this is enabled
by the ability to do integrity checking
automatically on the content but there
are also some things some ways in which
this benefits just the day-to-day
activities of preservation such as
format migrations and versioning of
content those things become much easier
when you're using a content addressed
approach this also impacts accession in
and the main way that this impacts
accession of content is that it lowers
the barriers to entry or the lowers the
barriers to accession of content in the
first place it anticipates the next
generation of tools the people who
create and share data in their daily
work are going to be using tools like
git tools like Apache spark which are
already using content addressed
approaches but the main thing is that it
opens up this possibility of submission
without upload where I can simply notify
my library or my compute community
archive of the hash of the content that
I want to be held in it's pin set and
the archive can pull that content into
its collections without having without
forcing me to stop my work it also
becomes easier for me the patron to
provide the context to provide metadata
context on to my collection using
whatever tools I see fit including doing
things like submitting a version series
of hashes
there is also the impacts on access
which is that replication of content
reinforces the availability so if you
have a spike and demand for that content
the system will naturally be replicating
and increasing the amount of available
versions that could be used to retrieve
the content it also allows us to do
things like be specific about versions
of content which becomes important when
people are relying on access versions of
data that lies in an archive it also
impacts discovery in really interesting
ways so in one sense you can think of it
as the metadata that we're tracking
about our collections is the data set in
and of itself which is a data set you
could publish over the decentralized web
that anyone could fork that collection
they could perform an machine analysis
on that collection or metadata in
Richmond and they could submit the
results which could be validated and
then potentially integrated into the
main the main version or official
version that an institution maintains or
community maintains but you can also
think of it in terms of blurring the
line between the metadata that's been
created by an institution or a library
and the metadata that metadata that were
created by the people who actually use
the underlying information that the
metadata created by an end-user can be
directly pulled into the collection as
part of the descriptive metadata or part
of the technical data and that that same
same information can be pulled out by an
end-user and repurposed and submitted
back in so we're reducing the boundaries
between those two things in a way that
ultimately impacts discovery in positive
ways it also provides a powerful means
of deduplication of content and
deduplication of effort and
deduplication of metadata so for example
if I already have metadata for a
particular piece of information you
could request the metadata and match it
against the content using a hash of the
content itself
this is the beginning of a conversation
about how we can use these technologies
to empower communities to share
possession of the data they rely on if
you find these ideas interesting or
you'd like to have or you'd like to
participate in the conversation about
where these technologies might go we've
been using the heading data together as
a placeholder for those conversations a
number of organizations are already
involved and we'd love to hear your
voice as well we're not only interested
in seeing how we can apply this with the
data of the web as we know it today but
we're also interested in looking at how
we can apply these tap apply these
patterns to the next round of data
that's arriving on the internet such as
the Internet of Things and the data
that's being produced for mixed reality
augmented reality and virtual reality
which will play such a central role in
the way that people encounter
information over the coming decades I
hope you found these ideas interesting
and inspiring and I look forward to
hearing from you